Authentication, Authorization, and Security 
===========================================

The primary purpose of security in DataONE is to protect Member Node data that reside within the system from intentional and or non-intentional harm; for example, DataONE security will prevent the unauthorized viewing of private data and or alteration or deletion of another user's data within the system.  DataONE computational services also benefit from security by protecting services and other system resources from malicious activity that often occurs on the Internet. Security for DataONE is part of the initial system planning and design, thereby providing solid integration to all services - it's not simply an "add-on" wrapper that occurs as an after thought.

Identity Management
-------------------

In today’s Internet society, users are commonly required to create new identities (i.e., user name and password) for each domain they interact with when they wish to access protected or sensitive resources so that resource providers can confidently verify the principal behind the request.  Unfortunately, this process has led to an over abundance of user identities and, ultimately, a user "identity" crisis - that is, it has now become a huge burden for users to keep track of all their identities necessary for traversing the Internet successfully.  One approach to mitigate this crisis is to utilize a single identity for all Internet services by adopting a standard mechanism for asserting a user’s identity.  In other words, a "single sign-on" verification that is recognized and trusted by resource service providers on the Internet.

For DataONE identity management, support of a single sign-on (SSO) capability is paramount because resource and system users will span numerous and multiple domains across the globe.  Simplifying the process to access DataONE resources is one way to reduce unnecessary barriers for the end user.  To this end, DataONE is working closely with the CILogon project at the National Center for Supercomputer Applications located at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign to streamline and incorporate user identities that originate from academic and commercial institutions in the U.S. that are members of the InCommon federation or through more globally accessible identity providers like Google, Facebook, and Yahoo.  CILogon acts as an intermediary broker of "short-lived" identity assertions that are made by users verifying their identity through their home institution or identity provider service.  These assertions are converted by CILogon into a longer-lived and more commonly recognized X.509 identity certificate, which can then be reused a number of times when interacting with DataONE.  Benefits of adopting an SSO approach to identity management through CILogon are two-fold: 1) users who regularly identify themselves through their home institution or other identity service will now be able to access DataONE resources without yet another identity to manage and 2) DataONE does not have to become yet another identity provider.

User and Service Authentication
-------------------------------

For DataONE, identity management and verification is only the first step in ensuring system-wide security.  All service calls within DataONE will require authentication of the caller.  The process of authentication for most users will begin with identity verification and downloading of the X.509 certificate from CILogon.  The user will then initiate an authentication action with DataONE in which a local desktop DataONE application, which is acting on behalf of the user, will perform a sequence of credential exchanges between the DataONE authentication service and the application.  This exchange sequence verifies (1) that the certificate originated from CILogon and (2) that the owner of the certificate, the user, is the actual party requesting authentication with DataONE (user identity verification is performed as prerequisite of the certificate).
Once user authentication succeeds, the DataONE authentication service will
generate an internal representation of a "security token" that contains DataONE
specific attributes, which uniquely identifies the user in the DataONE system
(e.g., system identity, nicknames, roles, and or associated groups of the
user).  Passed from DataONE service to DataONE service, such as making requests
from a Member Node to a Coordinating Node, the token contains all the necessary
information identifying the user of the original service call and other
attributes used to determine authorization in the DataONE system.  The token
itself will have a short "time to live", thereby limiting the duration of
malicious activity if a rogue application or user were to intercept the token.
The token will also have limited applicability, in that it will be intended to
be used from a particular host location on the internet, and have other
restrictions that prevent it from being broadly used as a surrogate for the
user.

The DataONE authentication service will also manage mappings between multiple external identities of a user to a single system identity.  This will allow users that have multiple identity providers to still be recognized in DataONE as the same person.  Because DataONE will not know these mappings in advance, users will still be required to register with DataONE so that new mapping may be assigned to their unique profile when they attempt to authenticate.  This registration process, however, does not require the need for a new identity; external identities suffice.

Services internal to the DataONE system may operate autonomously to perform maintenance tasks or other asynchronous activities that are not bound to a particular user.  In these cases, a security token will still be generated, but without the prerequisite identity verification.  Such tokens will have a special system identity that signifies it is a "trusted" principal of the DataONE system.  For most instances, this token will serve identically to one generated during the authentication process of normal user.

Privacy and Access Control
--------------------------

Privacy and access control in DataONE is primarily for the protection and integrity of user contributed data and metadata via Member Nodes.  There are, however, other entities in DataONE that also need protection, including DataONE specific services and system resources, like system metadata and components of the general software stack (e.g., databases, web servers) for Coordinating and Member Nodes.  For this reason, all resources in DataONE, from data and metadata objects to system services, will have a rule, called an access control rule, that is used to determine who may access the resource.  The process of confirming whether a user has privileges to access a resource in DataONE is called "authorization".  The act of authorization uses attribute information contained in the security token and compares such information to the resource access control rule.  If the rule permits access by the principal requesting the resource, then authorization succeeds and permission is granted to access the resource.

Because nodes that form the DataONE federation are managed by various administrative domains and may cross multiple political boundaries, a "trust" relationship is crucial for DataONE to succeed in its security plan.  In simple terms, this means that access control rules that are defined by one member of the federation are up held be another member.  It also means that trust may be revoked if a particular member does not behave accordingly within the federation.  Access control rules may be dynamic and must be propagated with the resource they are designated to protect, as when data or metadata objects are replicated to another Member Node.

The language that specifies the policy for a given access control rule dictates only whether a user is allowed access to a given resource; to include the ability to explicitly deny access to a resource overly complicates managing the authorization process and is seldom used in practice.  Rules will consist of the system identity of the user, also known as the "principal", the type of permission granted (e.g., read, write, and or execute), and the identifier of the resource being requested.  DataONE will provide, where reasonable, a conversion of the internal access control rule to a subset of one or more industry standard policy languages to support interoperability between different organizations.

System Integrity
----------------

Cybersecurity for DataONE is predicated on the fact that DataONE is a collaboration of researchers, data providers, institutions, coordinating nodes, member nodes, data collections and other infrastructure components. As such it is inherently a virtual organization. DataONE as an entity spans many organizations and administrative domains. The goal of the cybersecurity in DataONE is to protect the infrastructure that those organizations and administrative domains contribute to DataONE as well as the data collections and the DataONE user community. DataONE, as a virtual organization, will naturally need to accommodate the highly variable security regimes that are in use in its various partners. In planning for cybersecurity in this environment, a layered approach must be used. Each DataONE entity must simultaneously meet requirements of its local institution and must also integrate into the DataONE cyberinfrastructure. DataONE is also a mixture of operational systems to accept and deliver scientific data and research endeavors to improve the overall data management lifecycle. The cybersecurity management for DataONE will need to be flexible enough to support the very different needs of research and operations. The cybersecurity posture of DataONE will evolve over time both because of continuing maturation of DataONE operational strategies and because of an ever-evolving cybersecurity landscape.

AuthToken references
--------------------
Each DataONE AuthToken has a unique identifier that is affiliated with and
specifies the authentication session associated with a particular request.
DataONE AuthToken References are UUID values that are created by the DataONE
Session Service when a client requests that a session be established.  A client
can request that a session be established from a prticular Internet Protocol
address, and all service requests associated with that session MUST originate
from that Internet Protocol address.

The DataONE AuthToken reference is a unique identifier that references a
session that has been established for the purposes of interacting with
particular DataONE service providers. DataONE AuthToken references are generally 
passed in the header of an HTTP request to a service, thereby supporting clients 
that utilize authentication and those that do not, as well as Member Nodes that
support authentication and those that don't.  Any Member Nodes or clients that
do not support authentication and access contral will simply ignore the
presence of the AuthToken reference in the HTTP header information if one is 
present. 

The DataONE HTTP header containing the AuthToken has the name
'x-AuthToken' and contains an identifier value that is a UUID URN; for example, one might send the header:

x-AuthToken: urn:uuid:f689d586-59a6-11e0-8dac-3f586cd046b9

This session reference is used to indicate the session that should be used for 
requests, and has limited duration based on the session expiration time.
AuthToken references refer to sessions that have limited duration and other
constraints on their validity, and these constraints MUST be validated by
service providers.

If a Node or other data one service provider receives a service request with
the DataONE x-AuthToken header, then the service SHOULD retrieve the associated
AuthToken data in order to confirm that the client has appropriately
authenitcated with the DataONE session service.

AuthToken structure
--------------------
AuthToken data in DataONE is represented as a SAML assertion.  Details to 
follow.

..Note:: Descibe SAML Assertion propoerties here, including Subject,
SubjectConfirmationData, Constraints, and Attributes.

.. literalinclude:: ./saml-2-assertion-example.xml
   :language: xml

Authentication Service
----------------------
The DataONE Authenetication Service provides a set of services for validating
the identity of users and services and then establishing AuthTokens that can be
used to identify the sessions associated with these authenticated users.  A
single AuthToken is always associated with a single user and a single request
address.  The Authentication Service uses various methods to validate the
identity of a user in the system, and then produces an AuthToken in the form of
a SAML assertion that contains the relevant properties for that session.  Two
principal mechanisms are used to authenitcate DataONE users: a login service
that takes a DataONE-specific username/password pair as input and returns an
AuthToken reference on success, and an alternate service that takes a CILogon
certificate as input and returns an AuthToken reference on success.

..Note:: The CILogin service may not send the certificate itself, but rather a
token signed or encrypted using the account associated with the certificate. To
be determined after further discussion....

Service Methods
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* login(username, password):: AuthTokenReference
* login(certificate):: AuthTokenReference
* getAuthToken(authTokenReference):: AuthToken


